In order to form my research question for this assignment, I first needed to examine the data columns in the COVID-19 dataset. After looking at the summary data columns description, I was curious to know if there was a correlation between total tests and total deaths in a country. My hypothesis was that if a country utilized more total deaths, they would experience fewer total deaths because more testing would allow them to enact preventive measures or treatments sooner. I thought it would be most useful to compare the scaled data, that is tests and deaths per 1 million population.

When I examined the data I saw that the data frame contains 226 observations of 12 variables. Here I can see the correct syntax for the data columns that represent the two variables related to my question, “total_deaths_per_1m_population” and “total_tests_per_1m_population”. The summary also indicates that there are some instances of missing data to be identified and excluded in the next step using the na.omit function. This reveals a total of 169 missing values.

The histogram for total deaths per 1m population is extremely difficult to read because there are too many data points. I needed to adjust the “binwidth” before seeing a trend that the majority of countries experienced fewer than 2000 deaths per 1m population. There also appear to be some outliers above 4,000 deaths per 1m.

At first, I tried to make a scatter plot that showed each country’s data for total tests vs total deaths, but that had far too many points to read so I changed it to continents instead of countries. The scatterplot shows that countries in Europe used more total tests and experienced more total deaths per 1m population, but it seems like the majority of data is grouped together, but I think that has to do with the scale of the data being so large.

I made two separate bar charts, one that showed total COVID tests per 1M population by continent (I tried country first, but too many data points), and the other that showed total COVID deaths per 1M population by continent. Again, Europe has both the most tests and deaths by a significant amount.

Finally, I decided to make a box plot of total tests per 1m population by continent. This allowed me to better see outliers per continent. For example, in the bar charts and scatterplot it seemed like Europe had given far more COVID tests than any other continents, however, on the box plot I can see that there are 4 data points representing outliers in Europe alone! I think these outliers definitely skewed the data, and it might have been better if I cleaned them beforehand.

Overall, this exercise showed me the importance of not selecting too many data points for visual representation because then the chart becomes messy and difficult to read. Based on the data I examined, I think that the box plot was most useful. If I did this again, I might choose a different question because the amount of data was difficult to analyze. I couldn’t find much of a clear correlation between tests given per 1m and deaths per 1m. I wonder if that’s because each one of those variables was influenced by the total population and not by each other.
